 Case Title: SALAMI v. MUSE (2019) LPELR-47038(SC) SALAMI v. MUSE (2019) LPELR-47038(SC) In The
Supreme Court On Thursday, March 15, 2019 SC.75/2009 Before Our Lordships Musa Dattijo Muhammad
Kumai Bayang Aka'ahs Chima Centus Nweze Amiru Sanusi Sidi Dauda Bage ALFA SAKA SALAMI ALHAJI
MOHAMMED JODI MAGAJI MUSE FAMILY (For And On Behalf Of Muse Family) Justice of the Supreme Court of
Nigeria Justice of the Supreme Court of Nigeria Justice of the Supreme Court of Nigeria Justice of
the Supreme Court of Nigeria Justice of the Supreme Court of Nigeria APPELANT(S) RESPONDENT(S)
Between And RATIO DECIDENDI PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - PRELIMINARY OBJECTION - Whether a preliminary
objection should be considered and determined  rst before dealing with the merits of an appeal "I
will therefore dispose of the two grounds of the preliminary objection before turning to the four
issues (if necessary). This must be so for a preliminary objection is a pre-emptive strike; its
resolution will determine the question whether or not the appeal will be determined on the merit,
Jim-Jaja v C.O.P. Rivers State and Ors (2012) LPELR-20621 (SC) 10, paragraph F. Indeed, that is why
I am under obligation to resolve the issues agitated in the above preliminary objection before
taking any further step in the determination of this appeal, Okoi v Ibiang [2002] 10 NWLR (pt. 776)
455, 468; UBA Plc v ACB [2005] 12 NWLR (pt 939) 232; Goji v Ewete [2001] 15 NWLR (pt 736) 273, 280."
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - PRELIMINARY OBJECTION - Effect of a success of a preliminary objection
<span style="font-size: 12px;">"Once this preliminary objection on the competence of this appeal
succeeds, the proceedings in the appeal would be aborted and the need to consider the issues raised
therein would automatically abate, L. M. Ericsson Nig Ltd v Aqua Oil Nig Ltd (2011) LPELR-8807,
citing Ananeku v. Ekeruo (2002) 1 NWLR Pt. 748) 301, 30; NPA v. Eyamba [2005] 12 NWLR (pt 939) 409;
UBN v. Sogunro [2006] 16 NWLR (pt 1006) 504, 521-2."</span> PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - SIGNING OF
COURT PROCESS(ES) - Whether signing of Court process is a jurisdictional issue that can be raised at
any time; effect of a legal process signed in the name of a law  rm <span style="font-size:
12px;">"I observe that the building blocks in the architecture of the appellant's forensic edi ce
rest on a very weak foundation, his Statement of Defence. Now true indeed, the original Statement of
Defence, dated January 24, 2005, was signed by PP: Kayode Olatoke and Co, page 67 of the record. The
response of the appellant's counsel was that it was: ...wrong for the respondent to raise such
objection in this Court at this stage. This is because the issue on (sic) non - existence of
pleading or Statement of Defence of the appellant at [the] trial Court was not an issue or contended
at the trial Court and Court of appeal. The respondent have (sic) ample opportunity to raise the
issue of non - existence of defence of the appellant at the trial. This, he did not do. The issue
was not also conversed (sic) at the lower Court. This Court (sic) being Supreme Court (sic) is not a
Court of  rst instance. It will be clearly incongruous to ask this Supreme Court to act or make a
pronouncement on [an] issue or issues which did not come up before [the] trial Court or Court of
Appeal... [Paragraph 2. 02 - 2.03 of the Appellant's Reply  led on November 26, 2018, although
deemed properly  led on December 18, 2018]. With due respect, the above arguments of learned counsel
for the appellant, hastily beautiful, are not only, opinionated, but are, in actual fact,
sophistical. Truth told, his above submissions are characterized by their irreverence to, and
profanation of the inveterate doctrine of stare decisis, a doctrine of ancient, albeit, illustrious
jurisprudential pedigree, Abacha and Ors v Fawehinmi [2002] 6 NWLR (pt. 660) 228, 317; Emerah and
Sons Ltd v Attorney General Plateau State and Ors [1990] 4 NWLR (pt.147) 788; Global Trans Oceanic
S. A. v Free Ent. (Nig) Ltd [2011] 5 NWLR (pt 706) 426, 441; Osakwe v Federal College of Education
Asaba [2010] 10 NWLR (pt.1201) 1, 35 - 36. The arguments of the appellant's counsel had, indeed,
been settled by this Court in Wema Securities and Finance Plc v NAIC (2015) LPELR - 24833 (SC).
According to the Court [per Nweze, JSC]: ... Of course, it is still a valid general principle that
where a party seeks to raise a fresh issue on appeal, he must seek the leave of Court. Where he
fails to do so, the issue, which ipso facto is rendered incompetent, would be liable to be struck
out, A-G., Oyo State v Fairlakes Hotel Ltd [1988] 12 SC (pt. 1) 1; [1988] 5 NWLR (pt. 92) 1; Uor v
Loko [1988] 2 NWLR (pt. 77) 430. However, the issue of jurisdiction constitute an exception to this
general principle for it [such an issue of jurisdiction] could be raised for the  rst time before an
appellate Court, with or without leave, Obiakor and Anor v The State [2002] 10 NWLR (pt. 776) 612,
626 G; Gaji v. Paye [2003] 8 NWLR (pt. 823) 583; Oyakhire v The State [2006] 7 SCNJ 319, 327 - 328;
[2006] 15 NWLR (pt.1001) 157; Okoro v. Nigerian Army Council [2000] 3 NWLR (pt. 647) 77, 90 - 91;
Ajakaiye v. Military Governor, Bendel State [1993] 9 SCNJ 242; Yusuf v. Cooperative Bank Ltd [1994]
7 NWLR (pt. 359) 676. The lower Court's view that the issue of jurisdiction could be raised without
leave is well-taken. The reason is not far to seek. Due to its fundamental nature, it is exempted
from the disabilities and restrictions which hamper other legal points from being canvassed or
